\input texinfo    @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename majutsu.info
@settitle Majutsu User Manual
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@c %**end of header

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* Majutsu: (majutsu).   Using Jujutsu from Emacs with Majutsu.
@end direntry

@finalout
@titlepage
@title Majutsu User Manual
@subtitle for version 0.6.0
@author 0WD0
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Majutsu User Manual

Majutsu is a Magit-inspired Emacs interface for the Jujutsu (jj) version control system. It provides a powerful@comma{} interactive log viewer and a comprehensive set of commands for manipulating revision history with the efficiency and comfort Emacs users expect.

@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::
* Installation::
* Getting Started::
* Interface Concepts::
* Inspecting::
* Manipulating::
* Bookmarks::
* Tags::
* Git Integration::
* Workspaces::
* Conflict Resolution::
* Customizing::
* Template DSL::
* Keystroke Index::
* Function and Command Index::
* Variable Index::

@detailmenu
--- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Introduction

* About Majutsu::
* About Jujutsu::
* Acknowledgments::

Installation

* Requirements::
* Installing from Git::
* Post-Installation Tasks::

Installing from Git

* Doom Emacs::
* use-package with straight.el: use-package with straightel. 
* use-package with package-vc::
* Manual Installation::

Interface Concepts

* Buffers and Modes::
* Sections::
* Transient Menus::
* Visual Selection System::
* Completion and Confirmation::
* Running JJ::

Buffers and Modes

* Log Buffer::
* Diff Buffer::
* Blob Buffer::
* Process Buffer::
* JJ description Buffer::

Inspecting

* Log Buffer: Log Buffer (1). 
* Diffing::
* File and Blob Inspection::
* Annotate (Blame)::
* Ediff and Diffedit::
* Process Buffer: Process Buffer (1). 
* Operations (Experimental)::

Log Buffer

* Log Display::
* Log Options Transient::
* Revset Builder::
* Log Output Protocol (Sequential Markers)::
* @code{majutsu-log-commit-columns}::
* Configuration Examples::
* Migration Notes::
* Copying From Structured Row Buffers::

Diffing

* Diff Transient::
* Diff Buffer: Diff Buffer (1). 

Manipulating

* Creating Changes::
* Describing Changes::
* Committing::
* Editing Changes::
* Squashing::
* Absorbing::
* Rebasing::
* Duplicating::
* Abandoning::
* Undo and Redo::
* Splitting::
* Restoring::
* Reverting::
* Sparse Working Copy::
* Interactive Patching::
* Metaediting::
* Simplifying Parents::

Interactive Patching

* How It Works::
* Diff Context Inheritance::
* Visual Feedback::
* Selection Semantics::
* Technical Implementation::
* Edge Cases::
* Workflow Example::
* Customization::

Bookmarks

* Understanding Bookmarks::
* Bookmark Transient::

Tags

* Understanding Tags::
* Tag Transient::

Git Integration

* Git Transient::
* Pushing::
* Fetching::
* Gerrit Upload::
* Remotes::
* Clone and Init::
* Export and Import::

Workspaces

* Understanding Workspaces::
* Workspace Transient::

Conflict Resolution

* Detecting Conflicts::
* Entering Conflict Mode::
* majutsu-conflict-mode Commands::

Customizing

* Essential Settings::
* Confirmation Settings::
* Process Options::
* Display Options::
* Diff Options::
* Buffer Hooks::
* Description Options::
* Evil Integration::

Template DSL

* Overview::
* Why Use the DSL@?::
* Basic Syntax::
* Method Calls and Self::
* Operators::
* Conditionals and Composition::
* Elisp Embedding::
* Anonymous Functions and Higher-Order Operations::
* Extending the DSL::
* Type System and Upstream Alignment::
* Supported Commands (for development reference)::

Basic Syntax

* Vectors and Concatenation::
* String Literals::
* Raw Injection::
* Booleans and Numbers::

Method Calls and Self

* Explicit Method Chaining::
* Implicit Self Context::
* Explicit Receiver References::
* Binding Self in Helper Bodies::

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

@menu
* About Majutsu::
* About Jujutsu::
* Acknowledgments::
@end menu

@node About Majutsu
@section About Majutsu

Majutsu aims to bring the legendary workflow of Magit to the Jujutsu (jj) version control system. It is not merely a wrapper around the @samp{jj} CLI@comma{} but a deeply integrated Emacs environment that leverages Magit's section management and transient menu systems. Majutsu provides visual tools for complex operations like rebasing@comma{} squashing@comma{} and conflict resolution@comma{} making the power of Jujutsu accessible and intuitive.

Originally started as a fork of @samp{jj-mode.el}@comma{} Majutsu has been heavily refactored and expanded to include a new template DSL@comma{} asynchronous process handling@comma{} and a native Evil-mode integration.

@node About Jujutsu
@section About Jujutsu

Jujutsu (jj) is a next-generation version control system that is both simple and powerful. It features a unique "working copy is a commit" model (@@)@comma{} first-class support for mutable history@comma{} and robust conflict management. Unlike Git@comma{} jj does not have a staging area; instead@comma{} changes in the working copy are automatically recorded into the current revision. This makes it an ideal companion for Emacs@comma{} where buffers are often in a state of flux.

@node Acknowledgments
@section Acknowledgments

Majutsu stands on the shoulders of giants. We are grateful to:
@itemize
@item
The Jujutsu community for creating a revolutionary VCS@.
@item
The Magit authors and contributors for defining the gold standard of VCS interfaces.
@item
Brandon Olivier for the initial codebase of @samp{jj-mode.el}.
@end itemize

@node Installation
@chapter Installation

@menu
* Requirements::
* Installing from Git::
* Post-Installation Tasks::
@end menu

@node Requirements
@section Requirements

@itemize
@item
Emacs 29.1 or later.
@item
Jujutsu (jj) v0.40.0 or later installed and in your @samp{PATH}.
@item
@samp{magit} 3.3.0 or later (for section management).
@item
@samp{consult} 1.0 or later and @samp{plz} 0.9.1 or later (for native Gerrit completion).
@item
@samp{transient} 0.5.0 or later (popup menus).
@item
@samp{with-editor} (for descriptive message editing).
@end itemize

@node Installing from Git
@section Installing from Git

Majutsu is currently available via GitHub. You can install it using your preferred Emacs package manager.

@menu
* Doom Emacs::
* use-package with straight.el: use-package with straightel. 
* use-package with package-vc::
* Manual Installation::
@end menu

@node Doom Emacs
@subsection Doom Emacs

Add the following to your @samp{packages.el}:
@lisp
(package! majutsu :recipe (:host github :repo "0WD0/majutsu"))
@end lisp

@node use-package with straightel
@subsection use-package with straight.el

@lisp
(use-package majutsu
  :straight (:host github :repo "0WD0/majutsu"))
@end lisp

@node use-package with package-vc
@subsection use-package with package-vc

Emacs 29+ users can use the built-in @samp{package-vc} support:
@lisp
(use-package majutsu
  :vc (:url "https://github.com/0WD0/majutsu"))
@end lisp

@node Manual Installation
@subsection Manual Installation

Clone the repository and add it to your @samp{load-path}:
@lisp
(add-to-list 'load-path "/path/to/majutsu")
(require 'majutsu)
@end lisp

@node Post-Installation Tasks
@section Post-Installation Tasks

If you use Evil mode@comma{} Majutsu includes a native integration that provides sensible Vim-like keybindings. It is enabled by default if Evil is detected. You can customize this via @samp{M-x customize-group RET majutsu-evil RET}.

@node Getting Started
@chapter Getting Started

To begin using Majutsu@comma{} navigate to a directory within a Jujutsu repository and run @code{M-x majutsu-log} (or its alias @code{majutsu}).

If the directory is not a repository@comma{} Majutsu will offer to initialize one using @samp{jj git init}. Once the log buffer opens@comma{} you will see a graphical representation of your revision history@comma{} similar to Magit's log but with Jujutsu's unique features like hidden and divergent revisions clearly marked.

Navigation is straightforward: use @code{n} and @code{p} to move between revisions@comma{} and @code{RET} to visit the revision at point. Press @code{?} at any time to open the Dispatcher@comma{} which shows all available commands.

@node Interface Concepts
@chapter Interface Concepts

@menu
* Buffers and Modes::
* Sections::
* Transient Menus::
* Visual Selection System::
* Completion and Confirmation::
* Running JJ::
@end menu

@node Buffers and Modes
@section Buffers and Modes

Majutsu uses several specialized buffer types to provide a rich interface.

@menu
* Log Buffer::
* Diff Buffer::
* Blob Buffer::
* Process Buffer::
* JJ description Buffer::
@end menu

@node Log Buffer
@subsection Log Buffer

The primary interface for Majutsu. It displays the revision graph@comma{} working copy status@comma{} and active workspaces. It uses @samp{majutsu-log-mode}@comma{} derived from @samp{magit-section-mode}.

@node Diff Buffer
@subsection Diff Buffer

Displays changes between revisions or within the working copy. It supports Magit-style hunk and file sections@comma{} word-level refinement@comma{} and interactive patching.

@node Blob Buffer
@subsection Blob Buffer

Allows viewing the contents of a file at a specific revision. You can navigate through the file's history using @code{n} and @code{p} within the blob buffer.

@node Process Buffer
@subsection Process Buffer

Shows the output of background @samp{jj} commands. If a command fails@comma{} you can press @code{$} to inspect the error.

@node JJ description Buffer
@subsection JJ description Buffer

JJ descriptions are edited in an edit session. In the background@comma{} @samp{jj}
waits for the editor@comma{} usually @samp{emacsclient} via @samp{with-editor}@comma{} to save the
description file and return. If the editor exits with a non-zero status@comma{}
then @samp{jj} aborts the operation. The most important commands are therefore
those for finishing or canceling the edit session.

@table @asis
@item @kbd{C-c C-c} (@code{with-editor-finish})
@kindex C-c C-c
@findex with-editor-finish
Finish the current edit session successfully. @samp{jj} then uses the
description found in the file.

@item @kbd{C-c C-k} (@code{with-editor-cancel})
@kindex C-c C-k
@findex with-editor-cancel
Cancel the current edit session. @samp{jj} aborts the operation@comma{} but leaves the
edited file untouched.
@end table

JJ-generated comment blocks are highlighted using commit-message faces.
Lines beginning with @code{JJ:} are treated as comments@comma{} and @code{JJ: ignore-rest}
marks the remainder of the buffer as comment. You can customize
@code{majutsu-jjdescription-major-mode}@comma{} @code{majutsu-jjdescription-comment-prefix}@comma{}
@code{majutsu-jjdescription-change-id-face}@comma{} and
@code{global-majutsu-jjdescription-mode}. Jujutsu currently does not support
changing the comment prefix; the option exists for future compatibility.

Descriptions are also stored in a ring that lives for the duration of the
Emacs session. Majutsu saves the current description when an edit session
starts@comma{} and again when it finishes or is canceled@comma{} so older descriptions can
be recovered easily.

@table @asis
@item @kbd{C-c M-s} (@code{majutsu-jjdescription-save-message})
@kindex C-c M-s
@findex majutsu-jjdescription-save-message
Save the current buffer contents to the description ring.

@item @kbd{M-p} (@code{majutsu-jjdescription-prev-message})
@kindex M-p
@findex majutsu-jjdescription-prev-message
Cycle backward through the description ring@comma{} after saving the current
description to the ring. With a numeric prefix ARG@comma{} go back ARG entries.

@item @kbd{M-n} (@code{majutsu-jjdescription-next-message})
@kindex M-n
@findex majutsu-jjdescription-next-message
Cycle forward through the description ring@comma{} after saving the current
description to the ring. With a numeric prefix ARG@comma{} go forward ARG entries.

@item @kbd{C-c M-p} (@code{majutsu-jjdescription-search-message-backward})
@kindex C-c M-p
@findex majutsu-jjdescription-search-message-backward
Search backward through the description ring for a substring match.

@item @kbd{C-c M-n} (@code{majutsu-jjdescription-search-message-forward})
@kindex C-c M-n
@findex majutsu-jjdescription-search-message-forward
Search forward through the description ring for a substring match.

@item @kbd{C-c C-d} (@code{majutsu-jjdescription-show-diff})
@kindex C-c C-d
@findex majutsu-jjdescription-show-diff
Show the diff for the described change. If the buffer contains a
@code{JJ: Change ID:} line@comma{} then use that revision; otherwise fall back to @code{@@}.
@end table

@node Sections
@section Sections

Majutsu organizes information into collapsible sections. You can use @code{TAB} to toggle the visibility of a section (e.g.@comma{} a revision's description in the log@comma{} or a file in a diff).

@node Transient Menus
@section Transient Menus

Commands in Majutsu are grouped into "transient" menus. These popups allow you to select options and flags before executing a command. For example@comma{} pressing @code{r} opens the Rebase transient.

Primary action entries@comma{} such as executing a rebase@comma{} squash@comma{} split@comma{} or upload@comma{} also use @code{majutsu-transient-default-action} (default @code{RET}). When a primary action has its own command-specific key@comma{} the transient displays the command key and the default action key on the same row and either key invokes the action.

Some transients support saved defaults. Global defaults follow Transient's normal storage; repository-local defaults use jj's secure repo @samp{config-id} as the stable project key@comma{} so they survive moving the workspace. Where available@comma{} @code{W} saves the current transient arguments as defaults for the current jj repository only. This is intended for project-shaped UI policy such as log filters@comma{} diff format@comma{} and Git sync remotes@comma{} not for one-off destructive targets.

@node Visual Selection System
@section Visual Selection System

For commands like Rebase@comma{} Squash@comma{} or Absorb@comma{} Majutsu uses a visual selection system. You can mark "source" and "destination" revisions directly in the log buffer@comma{} and they will be highlighted with distinct colors until the operation is executed or cleared.

Selection entries that support both manual input and point toggling show both keys on one row@comma{} for example @samp{-r/r}: press the option key to read a revset manually@comma{} or the unprefixed key to toggle the revision at point. Majutsu runs these readers@comma{} point toggles@comma{} and primary actions in the buffer that opened the transient@comma{} so repository context@comma{} point defaults@comma{} and buffer-local selections stay consistent while the transient popup has focus.

@node Completion and Confirmation
@section Completion and Confirmation

Majutsu integrates with Emacs' completion system (like Vertico or Ivy) for selecting bookmarks@comma{} remotes@comma{} and revsets. Revset completion candidates are annotated with source labels (pseudo/workspace/bookmark/tag) to make ambiguous names easier to identify. Relation navigation keeps revision ids as the actual candidates and shows descriptions as annotations; structured-row field selection likewise keeps field names canonical while showing value previews as annotations. Destructive operations like @code{abandon} or @code{undo} will prompt for confirmation.

@node Running JJ
@section Running JJ

Majutsu runs @samp{jj} commands asynchronously whenever possible to keep the Emacs UI responsive. Large log graphs or remote operations won't freeze your editor.

@node Inspecting
@chapter Inspecting

@menu
* Log Buffer: Log Buffer (1). 
* Diffing::
* File and Blob Inspection::
* Annotate (Blame)::
* Ediff and Diffedit::
* Process Buffer: Process Buffer (1). 
* Operations (Experimental)::
@end menu

@node Log Buffer (1)
@section Log Buffer

The log buffer is the heart of Majutsu. It displays the history graph using a custom template DSL that mirrors the @samp{jj log} output but adds interactivity.

@menu
* Log Display::
* Log Options Transient::
* Revset Builder::
* Log Output Protocol (Sequential Markers)::
* @code{majutsu-log-commit-columns}::
* Configuration Examples::
* Migration Notes::
* Copying From Structured Row Buffers::
@end menu

@node Log Display
@subsection Log Display

Each revision in the log is a section. The visible anchor line is built from fields assigned to the @code{heading} module plus any auxiliary fields assigned to the @code{tail} module in @code{majutsu-log-commit-columns} (for example@comma{} author and timestamp). Graph prefixes and graph-related indentation are rendered as display-only prefix decoration rather than real buffer text@comma{} so they do not get copied accidentally and point does not land on them as editable text. Collapsed by default@comma{} you can expand a revision to see foldable @code{body} module content (for example@comma{} long descriptions).

Press @samp{[} to jump to a visible parent and @samp{]} to jump to a visible child. When more than one target is visible@comma{} completion returns the canonical revision id while displaying its description as an annotation.

@node Log Options Transient
@subsection Log Options Transient

@table @asis
@item @kbd{l} (@code{majutsu-log-transient})
@kindex l
@findex majutsu-log-transient
Open the log options transient.
@end table

Useful transient entries include:
@table @asis
@item @kbd{-r}
@kindex -r
Set a revset filter with Majutsu's standard revset expression reader (e.g.@comma{} @samp{all()}@comma{} @samp{mine()}@comma{} or @samp{A | B}). The current filter is prefilled for editing; submit an empty value to clear it.
@item @kbd{-n}
@kindex -n
Limit the number of revisions shown.
@item @kbd{-v}
@kindex -v
Toggle reverse order.
@item @kbd{-G}
@kindex -G
Toggle the ASCII graph.
@item @kbd{--}
@kindex --
Add fileset/path filters to limit the log to matching files.
@item @kbd{W}
@kindex W
Save the current log arguments as defaults for this jj repository.
@end table

@node Revset Builder
@subsection Revset Builder

While you can type revsets manually@comma{} Majutsu's selection system allows you to build them interactively. Commands that require a revset will often default to the revision at point or your current selection.

@node Log Output Protocol (Sequential Markers)
@subsection Log Output Protocol (Sequential Markers)

Majutsu's log parser uses an ordered marker protocol embedded in jj template output:

@itemize
@item
Entry start: @samp{\x1dS}
@item
Tail start: @samp{\x1dT}
@item
Body start: @samp{\x1dB}
@item
Metadata start: @samp{\x1dM}
@item
Entry end: @samp{\x1dE}
@end itemize

Within each module payload@comma{} fields are separated by @samp{\x1e}.

Protocol control bytes are reserved:

@itemize
@item
@samp{\x1d} for module markers
@item
@samp{\x1e} for field boundaries
@item
@samp{\x1f} for encoded logical newlines
@end itemize

Avoid emitting these bytes literally in user templates unless intentionally participating in the protocol.

Newline rules:

@itemize
@item
@strong{heading module}: may contain real physical newlines.
@item
@strong{tail/body/metadata modules}: stay in the trailing payload; encode logical newlines as @samp{\x1f} and decode them in postprocessing.
@end itemize

Parsing is strictly sequential and positional (not key/value based):

@enumerate
@item
Detect @samp{\x1dS} and lock the entry indent column.
@item
Collect heading lines until @samp{\x1dT} is found.
@item
Parse @samp{T -> B -> M -> E} payload segments in order on the final heading line (no extra physical line breaks between these module markers).
@item
Keep lines between current entry @samp{E} and next entry @samp{S} attached to the current section heading area (graph continuation lines).
@end enumerate

@node @code{majutsu-log-commit-columns}
@subsection @code{majutsu-log-commit-columns}

@code{majutsu-log-commit-columns} is a flat list of column plists.  Each plist
declares one field occurrence in one row module.

@table @asis
@item @code{:field}
Required field symbol.
@item @code{:module}
Required; one of @code{heading}@comma{} @code{tail}@comma{} @code{body}@comma{} or @code{metadata}.
@item @code{:template}
Required Majutsu template form@comma{} or a bound template variable.
@item @code{:face}
Optional highlighting policy; defaults to @code{t}.
@item @code{:post}
Optional postprocessor function@comma{} function list@comma{} @code{:default}@comma{} or @code{nil}.
@end table

A field may occur in different modules@comma{} but the same field/module pair may
occur only once.  @code{:instance} is reserved for compiler-generated occurrence
ids.

Only @code{metadata} occurrences populate canonical entry fields.  The default
columns therefore include metadata occurrences for @code{id}@comma{} @code{commit-id}@comma{}
@code{parent-ids}@comma{} @code{flags}@comma{} and @code{description}.  Preserve the fields needed by
stable section identity@comma{} relation navigation and annotations@comma{} and hash copying
when replacing the entire column list.

@enumerate
@item
@anchor{Module Semantics}Module Semantics


@table @asis
@item @code{heading}
Visible anchor-line content on the left (can span physical lines before the tail segment begins).
@item @code{tail}
Single-line auxiliary content rendered on the anchor line with right alignment. It remains searchable as real text@comma{} but copying a mixed heading+tail region drops the tail text by default; copying the tail alone preserves it.
@item
Rendered row spans are tagged with @code{majutsu-row-module}@comma{} @code{majutsu-row-field}@comma{} @code{majutsu-row-column}@comma{} @code{majutsu-row-entry-id}@comma{} and @code{majutsu-row-decoration} so explicit copy commands can distinguish content from graph/tail decorations.
@item
Hidden transport fields exist only when declared as @code{metadata} columns. The default list includes canonical metadata for identity@comma{} navigation@comma{} annotations@comma{} and copying; replacing the whole list also replaces those guarantees.
@item @code{body}
Foldable section body.
@item @code{metadata}
Parsed/stored for behavior and lookup; not directly shown by default.
@end table

@item
@anchor{Face Policy (@code{face})}Face Policy (@code{:face})


@table @asis
@item @code{t}
Preserve jj-provided text properties/highlighting.
@item @code{nil}
Strip text properties (plain string).
@item @code{FACE-SYMBOL}
Repaint field using that face.
@end table

If @code{:face} is omitted@comma{} Majutsu preserves jj-provided text properties (@code{t}).

@item
@anchor{Postprocessing (@code{post})}Postprocessing (@code{:post})


@code{:post} can be:

@itemize
@item
A function symbol
@item
A list of functions (applied left-to-right)
@item
Omitted or @code{:default} (uses default postprocessors)
@item
@code{nil} (disable column postprocessors)
@end itemize

Function contract:

@lisp
(fn VALUE &optional CTX) => NEW-VALUE
@end lisp

@code{CTX} includes at least @code{:field}@comma{} @code{:module}@comma{} and the normalized @code{:column}
spec.

Postprocessors run per column instance@comma{} so the same field can appear in
multiple modules and project to different values. Transport decoding (for
example@comma{} turning @samp{\x1f} back into @samp{\n}) happens before @code{:post} runs.

When you provide a function or function list in @code{:post}@comma{} Majutsu appends it
after the field's default postprocessors.
@end enumerate

@node Configuration Examples
@subsection Configuration Examples

@enumerate
@item
@anchor{Minimal columns}Minimal columns


@lisp
(setopt majutsu-log-commit-columns
        '((:field change-id :module heading
           :template majutsu-log-template-change-id :face t)
          (:field description :module heading
           :template majutsu-log-template-description :face t)
          (:field author :module tail
           :template majutsu-log-template-author :face magit-log-author)
          (:field timestamp :module tail
           :template majutsu-log-template-timestamp :face magit-log-date)
          (:field long-desc :module body
           :template majutsu-log-template-long-desc :face t)
          (:field id :module metadata
           :template majutsu-log-template-id :face nil)
          (:field commit-id :module metadata
           :template [:commit_id] :face nil)
          (:field parent-ids :module metadata
           :template majutsu-log-template-parent-ids :face nil)
          (:field flags :module metadata
           :template majutsu-log-template-flags :face nil)
          (:field description :module metadata
           :template [:description :first_line] :face nil)))
@end lisp

@item
@anchor{Keep heading multiline + encoded body multiline}Keep heading multiline + encoded body multiline


@lisp
;; heading field can emit real newlines directly
(setopt majutsu-log-template-description
        [:concat [:change_id] "\n" [:description]])

;; non-heading field should encode line breaks as \x1f
(setopt majutsu-log-template-long-desc
        [:description :lines :skip 1 :join "\x1f"])
@end lisp

@item
@anchor{Custom postprocessor}Custom postprocessor


@lisp
(defun my-log-trim (value &optional _ctx)
  (if (stringp value) (string-trim-right value) value))

(setopt majutsu-log-commit-columns
        (mapcar
         (lambda (column)
           (if (and (eq (plist-get column :field) 'description)
                    (eq (plist-get column :module) 'heading))
               (plist-put (copy-sequence column) :post #'my-log-trim)
             column))
         majutsu-log-commit-columns))
@end lisp
@end enumerate

@node Migration Notes
@subsection Migration Notes

The old @code{majutsu-log-commit-layout}@comma{} its top-level @code{:schema} / @code{:columns}
tree@comma{} compact @code{(FIELD TEMPLATE)} entries@comma{} and keys such as @code{:align} and
@code{:visible} have been replaced by flat column plists in
@code{majutsu-log-commit-columns}.
The historical @code{right-margin} placement has been replaced by the @code{tail} module@comma{} which renders real text on the anchor line with right alignment.
Move fields between visual areas by changing @code{:module} on the corresponding column plist@comma{} and adjust display behavior with @code{:face} and @code{:post}. In log buffers@comma{} copying a mixed heading+tail selection strips the tail text by default@comma{} while copying the tail itself preserves it. Graph prefixes and graph-related indentation are display-only@comma{} so ordinary copy operations only capture semantic content rather than the visible graph gutter.

@node Copying From Structured Row Buffers
@subsection Copying From Structured Row Buffers

Majutsu now provides both default copy filtering and explicit semantic copy commands for structured row buffers such as @code{majutsu-log-mode} and @code{majutsu-evolog-mode}. These commands are available through the dispatcher copy submenu and via @code{M-x}.

@table @asis
@item @kbd{? w s} (@code{majutsu-copy-section-value})
@kindex ? w s
@findex majutsu-copy-section-value
Copy the current section's stable value (for @code{jj-commit}@comma{} this is the revision id at point; for evolog entries@comma{} this is the commit id). If the region is active@comma{} it falls back to ordinary region copy.
@item @kbd{? w f} (@code{majutsu-row-copy-field})
@kindex ? w f
@findex majutsu-row-copy-field
Copy the rendered field value at point.
@item @kbd{? w F} (@code{majutsu-row-copy-entry-field})
@kindex ? w F
@findex majutsu-row-copy-entry-field
Choose any canonical field stored on the current entry@comma{} including hidden metadata that is not visible in the current layout. Completion keeps the field name as the candidate and displays a one-line value preview as its annotation.
@item @kbd{? w h} (@code{majutsu-row-copy-commit-id})
@kindex ? w h
@findex majutsu-row-copy-commit-id
Copy the current entry's commit hash from hidden metadata.
@item @kbd{? w m} (@code{majutsu-row-copy-module})
@kindex ? w m
@findex majutsu-row-copy-module
Copy the rendered visible module at point (@code{heading}@comma{} @code{tail}@comma{} or @code{body})@comma{} without graph-prefix or tail-spacer decoration.
@end table

This keeps ordinary Emacs copying predictable while still offering precise row-aware copy operations when you want semantic rather than purely visual text.

@node Diffing
@section Diffing

@menu
* Diff Transient::
* Diff Buffer: Diff Buffer (1). 
@end menu

@node Diff Transient
@subsection Diff Transient

@table @asis
@item @kbd{d} (@code{majutsu-diff})
@kindex d
@findex majutsu-diff
Open the Diff transient.
@end table

Useful transient entries include:
@table @asis
@item @kbd{r}
@kindex r
Select revisions to diff (@samp{--revisions}). Can specify multiple revisions or a revset like @samp{B::D}.
@item @kbd{f / t}
@kindex f / t
Select the @samp{--from} and @samp{--to} revisions.
@item @kbd{--}
@kindex --
Limit diff to selected files/filesets.
@item @kbd{-g}
@kindex -g
Toggle Git-style diff output.
@item @kbd{-W}
@kindex -W
Toggle color-words diff output.
@item @kbd{-S}
@kindex -S
Toggle stat output.
@item @kbd{-s}
@kindex -s
Toggle summary output.
@item @kbd{-c}
@kindex -c
Set context line count.
@item @kbd{-b / -w}
@kindex -b / -w
Ignore whitespace amount / ignore all whitespace.
@item @kbd{W}
@kindex W
Save the current diff arguments as defaults for this jj repository.
@end table

@enumerate
@item
@anchor{Understanding @samp{--revisions}}Understanding @samp{--revisions}


The @samp{--revisions} argument accepts any revset that forms a @emph{contiguous} set of commits. "Contiguous" means no gaps in the DAG@comma{} but @strong{forks and merges are allowed}.

Examples:
@table @asis
@item @samp{-r @@}
Changes in the working copy commit (default).
@item @samp{-r @@-}
Changes in the parent of the working copy.
@item @samp{-r B::D}
Total changes from B through D@.
@item @samp{-r 'A | B'}
Valid only if A and B form a contiguous set; gaps produce an error.
@end table

When visiting a file from such a diff:
@itemize
@item
On an @strong{added} or @strong{context} line: visits @samp{heads(revisions)}.
@item
On a @strong{removed} line: visits @samp{roots(revisions)-} (the parents of roots).
@end itemize

@strong{Note}: When the revset has multiple heads or roots@comma{} the target revision for file visits may be ambiguous. For example@comma{} in an X-shaped history:
@example
D   E       <- two heads
 \ /
  C
 / \
A   B       <- two roots
@end example
If you diff @samp{-r A::D | B::E}@comma{} there are two heads (D@comma{} E) and two roots (A@comma{} B). The diff shows changes from the @emph{merged} parents to the @emph{merged} heads. If D and E modify the same lines@comma{} the diff will show conflict markers. When visiting files@comma{} Majutsu picks one of the heads/roots@comma{} which may not be the specific commit where the displayed change originated. For precise navigation@comma{} use @samp{--from} / @samp{--to} with single revisions instead.
@end enumerate

@node Diff Buffer (1)
@subsection Diff Buffer

The diff buffer is highly interactive:
@table @asis
@item @kbd{@key{RET}} (@code{majutsu-diff-visit-file})
@kindex RET
@findex majutsu-diff-visit-file
Visit the appropriate version of the file at point. For working copy diffs@comma{} added/context lines visit the workspace file while removed lines visit the parent-side blob. For committed changes@comma{} it visits the blob at the corresponding side.
@item @kbd{C-j / C-<return>} (@code{majutsu-diff-visit-workspace-file})
@kindex C-j / C-<return>
@findex majutsu-diff-visit-workspace-file
Visit the workspace file@comma{} regardless of diff type. Note: when Evil mode is active@comma{} @code{C-j} may be overridden by Evil's section navigation; use @code{C-<return>} instead@comma{} which is unaffected.
@item @kbd{-} (@code{majutsu-diff-less-context})
@kindex -
@findex majutsu-diff-less-context
Decrease the context for diff hunks by COUNT lines.
@item @kbd{+} (@code{majutsu-diff-more-context})
@kindex +
@findex majutsu-diff-more-context
Increase the context for diff hunks by COUNT lines.
@item @kbd{0} (@code{majutsu-diff-default-context})
@kindex 0
@findex majutsu-diff-default-context
Reset the context for diff hunks to the default height.
@item @kbd{t} (@code{majutsu-diff-toggle-refine-hunk})
@kindex t
@findex majutsu-diff-toggle-refine-hunk
Toggle word-level refinement.
@item @kbd{T} (@code{majutsu-diff-toggle-fontify-hunk})
@kindex T
@findex majutsu-diff-toggle-fontify-hunk
Toggle syntax highlighting within diff hunks. With a prefix argument@comma{} cycle between highlighting the current hunk on selection and highlighting all hunks immediately.
@end table

When Evil mode is active@comma{} Majutsu follows evil-collection's
conventions for Magit diff buffers: @code{+} still increases context@comma{} @code{=}
decreases it@comma{} and @samp{~} resets it to the default.

When @samp{--color-words} is enabled@comma{} Majutsu renders the old/new line numbers in
the left margin and uses "@dots{}" lines to split hunks.
With refinement enabled@comma{} color-words hunks also show a shadow cursor on the
paired side (controlled by @samp{smerge-refine-shadow-cursor}).
Navigation (@samp{RET} / @samp{C-j}) still respects the side at point by using stored
line/column metadata from the color-words backend.

@node File and Blob Inspection
@section File and Blob Inspection

Majutsu's file inspector is implemented by @samp{majutsu-file} and can be used both
from command prompts and with defaults derived from the current section context.

Commands:
@deffn Command majutsu-find-file
Prompt for revset + path (defaulting from point when possible) and open that file as a blob.
@end deffn

@deffn Command majutsu-find-file-other-window
Like @code{majutsu-find-file}@comma{} but display the blob in another window.
@end deffn

@deffn Command majutsu-find-file-other-frame
Like @code{majutsu-find-file}@comma{} but display the blob in another frame.
@end deffn

Blob buffers are read-only snapshots with history-aware navigation:
@table @asis
@item @kbd{p / n} (@code{majutsu-blob-previous / majutsu-blob-next})
@kindex p / n
@findex majutsu-blob-previous / majutsu-blob-next
Jump to the previous or next revision that touched this file@comma{} while preserving cursor position as much as possible.
@item @kbd{V} (@code{majutsu-blob-visit-file})
@kindex V
@findex majutsu-blob-visit-file
Jump to the workspace version of the same file.
@item @kbd{C-c m} (@code{majutsu-blob-visit-magit})
@kindex C-c m
@findex majutsu-blob-visit-magit
Open the current blob in Magit's blob viewer.
@item @kbd{b} (@code{majutsu-annotate-addition})
@kindex b
@findex majutsu-annotate-addition
Start annotate for the current blob.
@item @kbd{g}
@kindex g
Revert or reload the current blob content.
@item @kbd{e / C-x C-q} (@code{majutsu-blob-edit-start})
@kindex e / C-x C-q
@findex majutsu-blob-edit-start
Enter editable blob mode (wdired-style).
@itemize
@item
Blob navigation keys are disabled while editing@comma{} so blob-mode bindings do not interfere with text edits.
@item Key: C-c C-c (majutsu-blob-edit-finish)
Apply changes through non-interactive @samp{jj diffedit} and exit edit mode. Majutsu copies current buffer text into the diffedit right side and finishes automatically@comma{} without opening the right-side temp file buffer.
@item Key: C-x C-q (majutsu-blob-edit-exit)
Leave editable mode. If modified@comma{} it prompts to save or abort; if unchanged@comma{} it exits immediately.
@item Key: C-c C-k (majutsu-blob-edit-abort)
Abort blob edits@comma{} restore the original content@comma{} and restore the original cursor position.
@item
In Evil:
@table @asis
@item @kbd{i}
@kindex i
In blob mode@comma{} enter editable blob mode and stay in normal state.
@item @kbd{i}
@kindex i
In editable mode@comma{} enter insert state.
@end table
@item
Editable mode also changes cursor visuals (see @code{majutsu-blob-edit-cursor-type}); with Evil@comma{} normal-state cursor is updated too.
@end itemize
@end table

@node Annotate (Blame)
@section Annotate (Blame)

Majutsu annotate is implemented by @samp{majutsu-annotate} and uses
@samp{jj file annotate} under the hood.

@table @asis
@item @kbd{b} (@code{majutsu-annotate-addition})
@kindex b
@findex majutsu-annotate-addition
Enter annotate from a blob or file buffer. When pressed again on an annotated chunk@comma{} jump to its parent revision (when available) and re-annotate there.
@item @kbd{c} (@code{majutsu-annotate-cycle-style})
@kindex c
@findex majutsu-annotate-cycle-style
Cycle heading/highlight/line styles (see @samp{majutsu-annotate-styles}).
@item @kbd{n / p} (@code{majutsu-annotate-next-chunk / majutsu-annotate-previous-chunk})
@kindex n / p
@findex majutsu-annotate-next-chunk / majutsu-annotate-previous-chunk
Move to the next or previous chunk.
@item @kbd{N / P} (@code{majutsu-annotate-next-chunk-same-commit / majutsu-annotate-previous-chunk-same-commit})
@kindex N / P
@findex majutsu-annotate-next-chunk-same-commit / majutsu-annotate-previous-chunk-same-commit
Move to the next or previous chunk from the same commit.
@item @kbd{@key{RET}} (@code{majutsu-annotate-show-commit})
@kindex RET
@findex majutsu-annotate-show-commit
Show the chunk's revision diff.
@item @kbd{M-w} (@code{majutsu-annotate-copy-hash})
@kindex M-w
@findex majutsu-annotate-copy-hash
Copy the chunk change-id.
@item @kbd{@key{SPC} / S-@key{SPC}} (@code{majutsu-annotate-show-or-scroll-up / majutsu-annotate-show-or-scroll-down})
@kindex SPC / S-SPC
@findex majutsu-annotate-show-or-scroll-up / majutsu-annotate-show-or-scroll-down
Scroll the diff window if it is already open.
@end table

@node Ediff and Diffedit
@section Ediff and Diffedit

@table @asis
@item @kbd{E} (@code{majutsu-ediff})
@kindex E
@findex majutsu-ediff
Open the Ediff transient.
@end table

Selection: choose revisions via @samp{--revisions} or @samp{--from} / @samp{--to} (with
point-toggle variants). In diff buffers@comma{} current range is used as default.

@table @asis
@item @kbd{e} (@code{majutsu-ediff-dwim})
@kindex e
@findex majutsu-ediff-dwim
Compare based on context (hunk@comma{} file@comma{} commit@comma{} or whole buffer).
@item @kbd{E} (@code{majutsu-ediff-edit})
@kindex E
@findex majutsu-ediff-edit
Run @samp{jj diffedit} with Emacs as @samp{ui.diff-editor}. If no file is at point@comma{} Majutsu prompts for a changed file@comma{} then launches a two-sided Ediff session for that single file (left/right temp files). Edit the right-side temp file and quit Ediff to return control to @samp{jj diffedit}. When @samp{majutsu-diffedit-finish-on-save} is non-nil@comma{} saving a diffedit temp file can finish the with-editor session automatically.
@item @kbd{m} (@code{majutsu-ediff-resolve})
@kindex m
@findex majutsu-ediff-resolve
Resolve conflicted files. In a @samp{jj-commit} section@comma{} it lists conflicted files for that revision; otherwise it uses working copy @samp{@@}. Uses @samp{jj resolve} with 3-way Ediff (merge tool: @samp{$left}@comma{} @samp{$base}@comma{} @samp{$right}) for up-to-2-sided conflicts@comma{} and falls back to @samp{jj diffedit} for conflicts with more than 2 sides. In this flow@comma{} quitting Ediff without editing leaves jj's output unchanged@comma{} so the conflict stays unresolved. If you edited and quit@comma{} Majutsu asks whether to save the resolved result; choosing no discards edits and keeps conflicts. When only part of a conflict is resolved@comma{} remaining regions are written with git-style conflict markers so jj keeps unresolved regions unresolved.
  Conflict-file completion preserves exact repository paths and annotates each
  candidate with its conflict side count.
@item @kbd{M} (@code{majutsu-ediff-resolve-with-conflict})
@kindex M
@findex majutsu-ediff-resolve-with-conflict
Open the resolve target buffer (working-copy file or revision blob)@comma{} enable @samp{majutsu-conflict-mode}@comma{} and jump to the first conflict.
@end table

Resolve entry points are available both from the Ediff transient and as direct commands:
@deffn Command majutsu-ediff-resolve
Resolve conflicted files using the default Ediff-based flow.
@end deffn

@deffn Command majutsu-ediff-resolve-with-conflict
Open the conflict target directly and enable @samp{majutsu-conflict-mode}.
@end deffn

@node Process Buffer (1)
@section Process Buffer

@table @asis
@item @kbd{$ (Emacs) / ` (Evil)} (@code{majutsu-process-buffer})
@kindex $ (Emacs) / ` (Evil)
@findex majutsu-process-buffer
Show the output of the last @samp{jj} command. This is essential for debugging failed operations or viewing long-running output such as remote fetches.
@end table

@node Operations (Experimental)
@section Operations (Experimental)

@table @asis
@item @kbd{X} (@code{majutsu-op-transient})
@kindex X
@findex majutsu-op-transient
Open the operation dispatcher with log@comma{} diff@comma{} restore@comma{} revert@comma{} undo@comma{} and redo actions.
@item @kbd{v} (@code{majutsu-evolog})
@kindex v
@findex majutsu-evolog
Open the evolution log for the revision at point. Evil users keep the ordinary global @samp{v} visual binding; contextual @samp{v} remains available in operation diff buffers.
@end table

@deffn Command majutsu-op-log-transient
Open the operation-log menu. Supports @samp{--limit}@comma{} @samp{--reversed}@comma{} and @samp{--no-graph}.
@end deffn

@deffn Command majutsu-op-log
View Jujutsu's operation history with its graph preserved by default.
  Rows mirror jj's compact operation format: normal and snapshot operations show short id@comma{} user@comma{} workspace@comma{} elapsed time@comma{} description@comma{} and all attributes; the root shows only its short id and @samp{root()}. Full ids and canonical metadata remain available to actions and the shared @code{? w} copy submenu. Read-only operation views pass @samp{--at-op=@@ --ignore-working-copy} to avoid snapshotting while browsing. Press @samp{d} to open an operation-diff transient prefilled from point@comma{} @samp{u} to restore@comma{} or @samp{r} to revert; @samp{RET} keeps the ordinary Majutsu visit behavior.
@end deffn

@deffn Command majutsu-op-diff-transient / majutsu-op-diff
Compare repository changes by operation@comma{} @samp{--from}@comma{} or @samp{--to} in a sectionized changed commit/ref view.
  Explicit @samp{--from} / @samp{--to} ranges show lightweight metadata for both endpoint operations@comma{} including their full ids@comma{} user@comma{} workspace@comma{} end time@comma{} and description. Changed lines keep full commit/change IDs internally. Press @samp{RET} or @samp{v} on a changed line to open its evolution log; elsewhere @samp{RET} keeps ordinary Majutsu visit behavior@comma{} and @samp{d} remains the ordinary Majutsu diff command. Operation metadata plus this diff view replace a separate operation-show buffer.
@end deffn

@deffn Command majutsu-evolog
View @samp{jj evolog} with its graph preserved and each entry parsed through Majutsu's structured row protocol. It is also available as @samp{? v} in the dispatcher.
  Entries mirror jj's compact evolog format; full change@comma{} commit@comma{} and optional operation IDs are hidden metadata available through @code{? w}. Press @samp{RET} to open jj's native Git-format inter-diff for the entry (using @samp{jj evolog --patch --git}); @samp{d} remains the ordinary Majutsu diff command.
@end deffn

@table @asis
@item Commands: majutsu-op-restore / majutsu-op-revert
Restore to an operation or revert an individual operation after confirmation.
@end table

@node Manipulating
@chapter Manipulating

@menu
* Creating Changes::
* Describing Changes::
* Committing::
* Editing Changes::
* Squashing::
* Absorbing::
* Rebasing::
* Duplicating::
* Abandoning::
* Undo and Redo::
* Splitting::
* Restoring::
* Reverting::
* Sparse Working Copy::
* Interactive Patching::
* Metaediting::
* Simplifying Parents::
@end menu

@node Creating Changes
@section Creating Changes

@table @asis
@item @kbd{O} (@code{majutsu-new-dwim})
@kindex O
@findex majutsu-new-dwim
Create a new change on top of the revision at point (DWIM).
@item @kbd{o} (@code{majutsu-new})
@kindex o
@findex majutsu-new
Open the New transient to specify options.
@item @kbd{A} (@code{majutsu-new-with-after})
@kindex A
@findex majutsu-new-with-after
Create a new change after the revision at point.
@item @kbd{B (Emacs) / I (Evil)} (@code{majutsu-new-with-before})
@kindex B (Emacs) / I (Evil)
@findex majutsu-new-with-before
Create a new change before the revision at point.
@end table

Useful transient entries include:
@table @asis
@item @kbd{-r}
@kindex -r
Parent revisions.
@item @kbd{-A}
@kindex -A
Insert after constraint.
@item @kbd{-B}
@kindex -B
Insert before constraint.
@item @kbd{-m}
@kindex -m
Set a message.
@item @kbd{-e}
@kindex -e
No edit (don't switch to the new change).
@end table
Runs: @samp{jj new -r REV}

@node Describing Changes
@section Describing Changes

@table @asis
@item @kbd{c} (@code{majutsu-describe})
@kindex c
@findex majutsu-describe
Edit the description of the revision at point. Supports @samp{--ignore-immutable} for immutable revisions.
@end table
Runs: @samp{jj describe -r REV}

@node Committing
@section Committing

@table @asis
@item @kbd{C} (@code{majutsu-commit})
@kindex C
@findex majutsu-commit
In Jujutsu@comma{} "commit" usually means finishing the current work. This command opens a description buffer for the working copy.
@end table
Runs: @samp{jj commit}

@node Editing Changes
@section Editing Changes

@table @asis
@item @kbd{e} (@code{majutsu-edit-changeset})
@kindex e
@findex majutsu-edit-changeset
Move the working copy (@@) to the revision at point. Supports @samp{--ignore-immutable} for immutable revisions.
@end table
Runs: @samp{jj edit REV}

@node Squashing
@section Squashing

@table @asis
@item @kbd{s} (@code{majutsu-squash})
@kindex s
@findex majutsu-squash
Open the Squash transient. You can select multiple source revisions (@samp{--from}) to squash into a destination (@samp{--into}).
@item @kbd{-r}
@kindex -r
Revision to squash.
@item @kbd{-f}
@kindex -f
Source revisions (@samp{--from}).
@item @kbd{-t}
@kindex -t
Destination revision (@samp{--into}).
@item @kbd{-o}
@kindex -o
Onto destination.
@item @kbd{-A / -B}
@kindex -A / -B
Insert after or before constraints.
@item @kbd{--}
@kindex --
Limit squash to specific filesets.
@item @kbd{-k}
@kindex -k
Keep commits that become empty after squashing.
@end table
Runs: @samp{jj squash --from SRC --into DEST [FILESETS...]}

@node Absorbing
@section Absorbing

@table @asis
@item @kbd{a (Emacs/Evil) / ? A} (@code{majutsu-absorb})
@kindex a (Emacs/Evil) / ? A
@findex majutsu-absorb
Open the Absorb transient.
@item @kbd{-f}
@kindex -f
Source revision (@samp{--from}@comma{} default @samp{@@}).
@item @kbd{-t}
@kindex -t
Destination revset filters (@samp{--into}@comma{} repeatable@comma{} default @samp{mutable()}).
@item @kbd{--}
@kindex --
Limit absorb to specific filesets.
@end table
Runs: @samp{jj absorb --from REV --into REVSETS... [FILESETS...]}

@node Rebasing
@section Rebasing

@table @asis
@item @kbd{r} (@code{majutsu-rebase})
@kindex r
@findex majutsu-rebase
Open the Rebase transient. This is one of Majutsu's most powerful features@comma{} allowing you to visually select sources and destinations.
@item @kbd{-s}
@kindex -s
Rebase a specific revision.
@item @kbd{-b}
@kindex -b
Rebase an entire branch.
@item @kbd{-o}
@kindex -o
Specify the destination (@samp{--onto}).
@end table
Runs: @samp{jj rebase -s SRC -o DEST}

@node Duplicating
@section Duplicating

@table @asis
@item @kbd{y} (@code{majutsu-duplicate})
@kindex y
@findex majutsu-duplicate
Open the Duplicate transient. Allows selecting source revisions and destination.
@item @kbd{Y} (@code{majutsu-duplicate-dwim})
@kindex Y
@findex majutsu-duplicate-dwim
Duplicate the revision at point onto its current parent.
@item @kbd{-r}
@kindex -r
Source revisions to duplicate.
@item @kbd{-o}
@kindex -o
Destination (@samp{--onto}).
@item @kbd{-A / -B}
@kindex -A / -B
Insert after or before constraints.
@end table
Runs: @samp{jj duplicate -r REV}

@node Abandoning
@section Abandoning

@table @asis
@item @kbd{k (Emacs) / x (Evil)} (@code{majutsu-abandon})
@kindex k (Emacs) / x (Evil)
@findex majutsu-abandon
Abandon the revision at point. Its changes are lost@comma{} and its descendants are rebased. With an active region selection@comma{} Majutsu abandons all selected revisions.
@end table
Runs: @samp{jj abandon -r REV}

@node Undo and Redo
@section Undo and Redo

@table @asis
@item @kbd{C-/ / C-? (Emacs)} (@code{majutsu-undo / majutsu-redo})
@kindex C-/ / C-? (Emacs)
@findex majutsu-undo / majutsu-redo
Undo or redo.
@item @kbd{u / C-r} (@code{Evil})
@kindex u / C-r
@findex Evil
Undo or redo.
@end table
Runs: @samp{jj undo} or @samp{jj redo}

@node Splitting
@section Splitting

@table @asis
@item @kbd{S} (@code{majutsu-split})
@kindex S
@findex majutsu-split
Open the Split transient. This allows you to split a revision into multiple parts.
@item @kbd{-r}
@kindex -r
Specify the revision to split.
@item @kbd{-o}
@kindex -o
Specify the destination (@samp{--onto}).
@item @kbd{-A / -B}
@kindex -A / -B
Insert after or before constraints.
@item @kbd{-m}
@kindex -m
Set a message for the first part.
@item @kbd{-p}
@kindex -p
Parallel split mode.
@item @kbd{--}
@kindex --
Limit split to selected files or filesets.
@end table
Runs: @samp{jj split -r REV [FILESETS...]}

@node Restoring
@section Restoring

@table @asis
@item @kbd{R} (@code{majutsu-restore})
@kindex R
@findex majutsu-restore
Open the Restore transient for undoing changes.
@item @kbd{-f}
@kindex -f
Restore from a specific revision (@samp{--from}).
@item @kbd{-t}
@kindex -t
Restore to a specific revision (@samp{--to}).
@item @kbd{-c}
@kindex -c
Undo changes introduced by a revision (@samp{--changes-in}).
@item @kbd{-d}
@kindex -d
Restore descendants as well.
@item @kbd{--}
@kindex --
Limit restore to selected files or filesets.
@end table
Runs: @samp{jj restore --from REV [FILESETS...]} or @samp{jj restore --changes-in REV [FILESETS...]}

@node Reverting
@section Reverting

@table @asis
@item @kbd{V (Emacs) / _ (Evil)} (@code{majutsu-revert})
@kindex V (Emacs) / _ (Evil)
@findex majutsu-revert
Open the Revert transient to create reverse changes in a new revision.
@item @kbd{-r}
@kindex -r
Source revisions to revert (@samp{--revisions}).
@item @kbd{-o}
@kindex -o
Apply reverse changes on top of revisions (@samp{--onto}).
@item @kbd{-A / -B}
@kindex -A / -B
Insert reverse changes after or before selected revisions.
@end table
Runs: @samp{jj revert --revisions REV --onto DEST}

@node Sparse Working Copy
@section Sparse Working Copy

@table @asis
@item @kbd{>} (@code{majutsu-sparse})
@kindex >
@findex majutsu-sparse
Open the sparse working copy transient (set@comma{} add@comma{} remove@comma{} list@comma{} edit).
@end table

Sparse transient actions:
@table @asis
@item @kbd{l} (@code{majutsu-sparse-list})
@kindex l
@findex majutsu-sparse-list
List current sparse patterns in @samp{*Majutsu Sparse*}.
@item @kbd{s / S} (@code{majutsu-sparse-set / majutsu-sparse-set-clear})
@kindex s / S
@findex majutsu-sparse-set / majutsu-sparse-set-clear
Set patterns by appending@comma{} or replace the entire set after clearing it first.
@item @kbd{a / r} (@code{majutsu-sparse-add / majutsu-sparse-remove})
@kindex a / r
@findex majutsu-sparse-add / majutsu-sparse-remove
Add or remove patterns incrementally.
@item @kbd{e} (@code{majutsu-sparse-edit})
@kindex e
@findex majutsu-sparse-edit
Edit patterns via @samp{jj sparse edit}.
@item @kbd{R} (@code{majutsu-sparse-reset})
@kindex R
@findex majutsu-sparse-reset
Reset to all files (@samp{jj sparse reset}).
@end table

Notes:
@itemize
@item
Editing patterns opens a temporary @samp{.jjsparse} buffer.
@item
Lines starting with @code{JJ:} are comments and are ignored by Jujutsu.
@item
Pattern completion includes current directories/files from @samp{@@}.
@item
Default "all files" state is represented by single pattern @samp{.}.
@end itemize

@node Interactive Patching
@section Interactive Patching

Majutsu provides Magit-style partial hunk selection for Jujutsu operations. This allows you to select specific hunks@comma{} files@comma{} or even regions within hunks to include in Split@comma{} Squash@comma{} or Restore operations.

@menu
* How It Works::
* Diff Context Inheritance::
* Visual Feedback::
* Selection Semantics::
* Technical Implementation::
* Edge Cases::
* Workflow Example::
* Customization::
@end menu

@node How It Works
@subsection How It Works

Interactive selection is integrated into the Split (@code{S})@comma{} Squash (@code{s})@comma{} and Restore (@code{R}) transients. When you open one of these transients from a Diff buffer@comma{} a "Patch Selection" group appears with the following commands:

@multitable {aaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Key
@tab Command
@tab Description
@item @code{H}
@tab majutsu-interactive-toggle-hunk
@tab Toggle selection of hunk at point
@item @code{F}
@tab majutsu-interactive-toggle-file
@tab Toggle all hunks; hunkless file in Split
@item @code{R}
@tab majutsu-interactive-toggle-region
@tab Toggle selection of active region
@item @code{C}
@tab majutsu-interactive-clear
@tab Clear all patch selections
@end multitable

@node Diff Context Inheritance
@subsection Diff Context Inheritance

When opening Split@comma{} Squash@comma{} or Restore from a Diff buffer@comma{} the transient automatically inherits the diff's context:
@itemize
@item
All three commands inherit @samp{--revisions} as their target revision (@samp{--revision} for Split/Squash)
@item
Restore additionally inherits @samp{--from} and @samp{--to} parameters@comma{} allowing selective restoration between arbitrary revisions
@end itemize

This means you can:
@enumerate
@item
View a diff with specific @samp{--from} / @samp{--to} revisions
@item
Open the Restore transient
@item
Select specific hunks to restore
@item
The restore will apply only to those hunks@comma{} using the diff's revision context
@end enumerate

@node Visual Feedback
@subsection Visual Feedback

Selected hunks are highlighted with @samp{majutsu-interactive-selected-hunk} face (green background by default). Selected regions within hunks use @samp{majutsu-interactive-selected-region} face (purple background). A selected hunkless whole-file Split change uses @samp{majutsu-interactive-selected-file}.

@node Selection Semantics
@subsection Selection Semantics

The meaning of "selected" differs by operation:

@enumerate
@item
@anchor{Split and Squash}Split and Squash


For Split and Squash@comma{} @strong{selected content is what gets moved}:
@itemize
@item
@strong{Split}: Selected hunks/regions go into the @strong{first} commit; unselected content stays in the second commit.
@item
@strong{Squash}: Selected hunks/regions get @strong{squashed into the parent}; unselected content remains in the current revision.
@end itemize

Example: You have a revision with changes to files A@comma{} B@comma{} and C@. You want to squash only the changes to file A into the parent:
@enumerate
@item
Open the diff for the revision (@code{D})
@item
Open Squash transient (@code{s})
@item
Press @code{F} on file A to select all its hunks
@item
Execute squash - file A's changes go to parent@comma{} B and C stay
@end enumerate

@item
@anchor{Restore}Restore


For Restore@comma{} selected content is what gets @strong{restored} (undone):
@itemize
@item
Selected hunks/regions are reverted to their state in the source revision
@item
Unselected content is left unchanged
@end itemize
@end enumerate

@node Technical Implementation
@subsection Technical Implementation

Majutsu uses a custom merge tool to apply partial patches. When you execute an operation with selections:

@enumerate
@item
@strong{Patch Generation}: Majutsu generates a unified diff patch containing only the selected hunks/regions.

@item
@strong{Tool Invocation}: Jujutsu's @samp{-i --tool} mechanism is used with a custom @samp{majutsu-applypatch} tool.

Each invocation receives its own temporary patch and helper directory. An
overlapping asynchronous operation therefore cannot overwrite another
operation's inputs.

@item
@strong{Patch Application}:
@itemize
@item
For @strong{Split/Squash}: The tool resets @samp{$right} (current state) to @samp{$left} (parent state)@comma{} then applies the patch forward. This results in @samp{$right} containing only the selected changes.
@item
For @strong{Restore}: The tool applies the patch directly to @samp{$right}.
@end itemize
@end enumerate

This approach avoids the complexity of reverse patch application (@samp{git apply -R})@comma{} which has edge cases with new files@comma{} deleted files@comma{} and content starting with @samp{+} or @samp{-}.

@node Edge Cases
@subsection Edge Cases

Text-hunk selection supports the file operations below. Split additionally
supports hunkless whole-file changes as described at the end of this section.

@enumerate
@item
@anchor{New Files}New Files


When splitting or squashing a new file:
@itemize
@item
If you select the entire file@comma{} it goes to the first commit / gets squashed
@item
If you select only part of the file@comma{} only those lines go; the rest stays
@item
Partial selection of new files works correctly because the patch is applied forward after resetting to parent state
@end itemize

@item
@anchor{Deleted Files}Deleted Files


@strong{Note: Interactive selection for deleted files is currently limited.}

When splitting or squashing a file deletion:
@itemize
@item
Selecting the @strong{entire} deletion works correctly - the file gets deleted in the first commit / parent
@item
@strong{Partial selection of deleted files is not yet supported} - you must select all lines or none
@end itemize

This limitation exists because git's patch format requires @samp{deleted file mode}
patches to remove the entire file contents. Partial deletion would require
converting to a regular modification patch@comma{} which has edge cases with context
matching.

@item
@anchor{Renamed/Copied Files}Renamed/Copied Files


Renamed and copied files are handled correctly:
@itemize
@item
Text-hunk patches preserve the rendered rename/copy headers
@item
You can select specific hunks within renamed files just like regular modifications
@end itemize

In a Git-format diff buffer@comma{} hunkless whole-file changes (for example binary
or mode-only changes) can be selected as a unit by Split. Their status and
source/target paths come from a separate JSON @samp{jj diff -T} query for the same
range and filesets@comma{} never from the rendered @samp{diff --git} header. If that
metadata is unavailable@comma{} reordered@comma{} or inconsistent with the displayed patch@comma{}
Majutsu refuses the whole-file selection. Squash and Restore do not support
hunkless whole-file selection.
@end enumerate

@node Workflow Example
@subsection Workflow Example

@enumerate
@item
Open a diff with @code{D} or @code{d}
@item
Open Split (@code{S})@comma{} Squash (@code{s})@comma{} or Restore (@code{R}) transient
@item
Use @code{H} to select individual hunks@comma{} or @code{F} to select all hunks in a file
@item
For fine-grained control@comma{} mark a region and press @code{R} to select only those lines
@item
Press @code{C} to clear selections if needed
@item
Execute the operation - only selected changes will be affected
@end enumerate

@node Customization
@subsection Customization

@table @asis
@item Face: majutsu-interactive-selected-hunk
Face for selected hunks.
@item Face: majutsu-interactive-selected-region
Face for selected regions.
@item Face: majutsu-interactive-selected-file
Face for selected hunkless whole-file Split changes.
@end table

@node Metaediting
@section Metaediting

@table @asis
@item @kbd{? m} (@code{majutsu-metaedit})
@kindex ? m
@findex majutsu-metaedit
Open the Metaedit transient. Defaults to one revision from point (fallback @samp{@@}). If multiple revisions are selected@comma{} Majutsu asks you to narrow it down.
@item @kbd{-r / -m / -a / -t}
@kindex -r / -m / -a / -t
Set revision@comma{} message@comma{} author@comma{} and author timestamp.
@item @kbd{-c / -u / -U / -f}
@kindex -c / -u / -U / -f
Toggle update-change-id@comma{} update-author@comma{} update-author-timestamp@comma{} or force-rewrite.
@item @kbd{-I}
@kindex -I
Ignore immutable revisions.
@end table
Runs: @samp{jj metaedit [OPTIONS...] REV}

@node Simplifying Parents
@section Simplifying Parents

@table @asis
@item @kbd{? P} (@code{majutsu-simplify-parents})
@kindex ? P
@findex majutsu-simplify-parents
Open the Simplify Parents transient.
@item @kbd{-s}
@kindex -s
Simplify specified revision(s) together with descendant trees (@samp{--source}).
@item @kbd{-r}
@kindex -r
Simplify specified revision(s) only (@samp{--revision}).
@item @kbd{-I}
@kindex -I
Ignore immutable revisions.
@end table
If neither @samp{--source} nor @samp{--revision} is set@comma{} the Simplify action defaults to selected region revisions@comma{} then the revision at point@comma{} then @samp{@@}.
Runs: @samp{jj simplify-parents [--source REVSET] [--revision REVSET]}

@node Bookmarks
@chapter Bookmarks

@menu
* Understanding Bookmarks::
* Bookmark Transient::
@end menu

@node Understanding Bookmarks
@section Understanding Bookmarks

In Jujutsu@comma{} bookmarks are similar to Git branches but are explicitly tracked. They point to a specific change ID@.

@node Bookmark Transient
@section Bookmark Transient

@table @asis
@item @kbd{b} (@code{majutsu-bookmark})
@kindex b
@findex majutsu-bookmark
Open the bookmark transient.

@item @kbd{l} (@code{majutsu-bookmark-list})
@kindex l
@findex majutsu-bookmark-list
List all bookmarks.
@item @kbd{c} (@code{majutsu-bookmark-create})
@kindex c
@findex majutsu-bookmark-create
Create a new bookmark at point.
@item @kbd{a} (@code{majutsu-bookmark-advance})
@kindex a
@findex majutsu-bookmark-advance
Advance bookmarks using jj's configured default selection and target revset.
@item @kbd{A} (@code{majutsu-bookmark-advance-to})
@kindex A
@findex majutsu-bookmark-advance-to
Advance bookmarks using jj's default selection to an explicit target revset.
@item @kbd{p} (@code{majutsu-bookmark-advance-patterns})
@kindex p
@findex majutsu-bookmark-advance-patterns
Advance specific bookmark name(s)/pattern(s) using jj's configured default target revset.
@item @kbd{s} (@code{majutsu-bookmark-set})
@kindex s
@findex majutsu-bookmark-set
Set or move an existing bookmark to the current revision.
@item @kbd{m} (@code{majutsu-bookmark-move})
@kindex m
@findex majutsu-bookmark-move
Move a bookmark.
@item @kbd{M} (@code{majutsu-bookmark-move-allow-backwards})
@kindex M
@findex majutsu-bookmark-move-allow-backwards
Move bookmark(s) with @samp{--allow-backwards}.
@item @kbd{r} (@code{majutsu-bookmark-rename})
@kindex r
@findex majutsu-bookmark-rename
Rename a bookmark.
@item @kbd{d} (@code{majutsu-bookmark-delete})
@kindex d
@findex majutsu-bookmark-delete
Delete a bookmark; this deletion propagates to remotes.
@item @kbd{f} (@code{majutsu-bookmark-forget})
@kindex f
@findex majutsu-bookmark-forget
Forget a bookmark locally without affecting remotes.
@item @kbd{t} (@code{majutsu-bookmark-track})
@kindex t
@findex majutsu-bookmark-track
Track a remote bookmark to create a local one.
@item @kbd{u} (@code{majutsu-bookmark-untrack})
@kindex u
@findex majutsu-bookmark-untrack
Untrack a remote bookmark.
@end table

Bookmark lists nest tracked remote bookmarks under their local bookmark.
When a bookmark target is conflicted@comma{} its removed and added targets appear as
child revision sections identified by their full commit IDs.

@node Tags
@chapter Tags

@menu
* Understanding Tags::
* Tag Transient::
@end menu

@node Understanding Tags
@section Understanding Tags

In Jujutsu@comma{} tags are lightweight refs that point to revisions@comma{} similar to Git tags.
Majutsu wraps @samp{jj tag set/list/delete} and follows jj semantics where creating and
moving tags both use @samp{tag set} (moving requires @samp{--allow-move}).

@node Tag Transient
@section Tag Transient

Tag commands are intentionally dispatch-first.

@table @asis
@item @kbd{? t} (@code{majutsu-tag})
@kindex ? t
@findex majutsu-tag
Open the tag transient.
@item @kbd{l} (@code{majutsu-tag-list})
@kindex l
@findex majutsu-tag-list
List tags in a dedicated buffer.
@item @kbd{s} (@code{majutsu-tag-set})
@kindex s
@findex majutsu-tag-set
Set tag(s). Uses completion and allows new names.
@item @kbd{m} (@code{majutsu-tag-move})
@kindex m
@findex majutsu-tag-move
Move existing tag(s) to another revision (internally @samp{--allow-move}).
@item @kbd{d} (@code{majutsu-tag-delete})
@kindex d
@findex majutsu-tag-delete
Delete tag(s) by name or pattern.
@end table

Tag prompts use completion candidates from local tags. Existing tags are shown for
selection@comma{} while set/delete prompts still allow entering string patterns manually.

@node Git Integration
@chapter Git Integration

@menu
* Git Transient::
* Pushing::
* Fetching::
* Gerrit Upload::
* Remotes::
* Clone and Init::
* Export and Import::
@end menu

@node Git Transient
@section Git Transient

@table @asis
@item @kbd{G (Emacs) / ? G (Evil)} (@code{majutsu-git-transient})
@kindex G (Emacs) / ? G (Evil)
@findex majutsu-git-transient
Open the Git transient. Jujutsu can interact directly with Git remotes.
@end table

@node Pushing
@section Pushing

@table @asis
@item @kbd{p} (@code{majutsu-git-push-transient})
@kindex p
@findex majutsu-git-push-transient
Open the Push transient. You can push bookmarks@comma{} revisions@comma{} or changes.
@item @kbd{-a}
@kindex -a
Push all bookmarks.
@item @kbd{-t}
@kindex -t
Push tracked bookmarks only.
@item @kbd{-b}
@kindex -b
Push specific bookmark(s).
@item @kbd{-c}
@kindex -c
Push a specific change.
@item @kbd{-r}
@kindex -r
Push specific revision(s).
@item @kbd{-o}
@kindex -o
Pass a Git push option; may be repeated.
@item @kbd{-y}
@kindex -y
Show what would be pushed without pushing (@samp{--dry-run}).
@item @kbd{W}
@kindex W
Save stable push options as defaults for this jj repository. Majutsu remembers sync policy such as @samp{--remote}@comma{} @samp{--all}@comma{} @samp{--tracked}@comma{} @samp{--deleted}@comma{} @samp{--allow-empty-description}@comma{} and @samp{--allow-private}@comma{} but does not remember one-off targets like @samp{--bookmark}@comma{} @samp{--change}@comma{} @samp{--revisions}@comma{} @samp{--named}@comma{} @samp{--option}@comma{} or @samp{--dry-run}.
@end table
Runs: @samp{jj git push}

@node Fetching
@section Fetching

@table @asis
@item @kbd{f} (@code{majutsu-git-fetch-transient})
@kindex f
@findex majutsu-git-fetch-transient
Open the Fetch transient to pull changes from a remote.
@item @kbd{-R}
@kindex -R
Fetch from a specific remote; may be repeated.
@item @kbd{-b}
@kindex -b
Fetch a specific branch; may be repeated.
@item @kbd{-t}
@kindex -t
Fetch only tracked bookmarks.
@item @kbd{-A}
@kindex -A
Fetch from all remotes.
@item @kbd{W}
@kindex W
Save stable fetch options as defaults for this jj repository. Majutsu remembers @samp{--remote}@comma{} @samp{--tracked}@comma{} and @samp{--all-remotes}@comma{} but not branch-specific @samp{--branch} selections.
@end table
Runs: @samp{jj git fetch}

@node Gerrit Upload
@section Gerrit Upload

@table @asis
@item @kbd{u} (@code{majutsu-gerrit-upload-transient})
@kindex u
@findex majutsu-gerrit-upload-transient
Open the Gerrit upload transient.
@item @kbd{-r}
@kindex -r
Upload specific revision(s).
@item @kbd{r}
@kindex r
Toggle the revision at point into or out of the upload selection. If no revision is selected@comma{} Majutsu leaves revision selection to @samp{jj gerrit upload}@comma{} which uses its own @@/@@- default.
@item @kbd{-b}
@kindex -b
Target remote branch (@samp{--remote-branch}).
@item @kbd{-R}
@kindex -R
Gerrit remote (@samp{--remote}).
@item @kbd{-n}
@kindex -n
Preview without pushing (@samp{--dry-run}).
@item
Review options include reviewers@comma{} CCs@comma{} labels@comma{} topic@comma{} hashtags@comma{} and a patch set message.
@item
State/notification options include change edit@comma{} WIP/ready@comma{} private/remove-private@comma{} publishing comments@comma{} notification policy@comma{} and attention-set handling.
@item
Advanced options expose submit@comma{} skip validation@comma{} merged uploads@comma{} deadlines@comma{} custom keyed values@comma{} and trace values.
@item @kbd{W}
@kindex W
Save stable upload options as defaults for this jj repository. Majutsu remembers @samp{--remote}@comma{} @samp{--remote-branch}@comma{} @samp{--notify}@comma{} and @samp{--ignore-attention-set}@comma{} but not revisions@comma{} dry-run@comma{} metadata@comma{} state@comma{} or submit-related flags.
@end table
Runs: @samp{jj gerrit upload}

Reviewer/CC prompts use Majutsu's native Gerrit REST client and Gerrit's
@samp{/accounts/} suggestion endpoint. Topic completion uses the same REST client to
query open changes and aggregate existing topics. Label and hashtag prompts are
free-form minibuffer input.

REST-backed completion is enabled only when Majutsu can determine a reliable
Gerrit web/API origin. HTTP(S) remotes work directly. For SSH remotes such as
@samp{ssh://user@@host:29418/project}@comma{} configure Gerrit's web URL explicitly@comma{} for
example:

@example
jj config set --repo gerrit.review-url http://host:8080
@end example

Majutsu intentionally does not guess a web/API URL from SSH port @samp{29418}.
This setting is not required for @samp{jj gerrit upload} itself; upstream jj uses
@samp{gerrit.review-url} only to generate @samp{Link:} trailers instead of @samp{Change-Id:}
trailers. Majutsu also uses it as a reliable web/API base for native Gerrit
completion.

@node Remotes
@section Remotes

@table @asis
@item @kbd{r} (@code{majutsu-git-remote-transient})
@kindex r
@findex majutsu-git-remote-transient
Open the Remote Management transient.
@item @kbd{l} (@code{majutsu-git-remote-list})
@kindex l
@findex majutsu-git-remote-list
List remotes.
@item @kbd{a} (@code{majutsu-git-remote-add-transient})
@kindex a
@findex majutsu-git-remote-add-transient
Add a new Git remote as @samp{jj git remote add [OPTIONS] REMOTE URL}. Majutsu prompts for a new remote name@comma{} rejects names that already exist@comma{} prompts for the URL/path positional@comma{} and exposes @samp{--fetch-tags} and @samp{--push-url}.
@item @kbd{d} (@code{majutsu-git-remote-remove})
@kindex d
@findex majutsu-git-remote-remove
Remove an existing remote. In the remote list buffer@comma{} the remote at point is used as the default.
@item @kbd{r} (@code{majutsu-git-remote-rename})
@kindex r
@findex majutsu-git-remote-rename
Rename an existing remote to a new remote name.
@item @kbd{u} (@code{majutsu-git-remote-set-url-transient})
@kindex u
@findex majutsu-git-remote-set-url-transient
Set remote URLs. With no option@comma{} Majutsu prompts for the fetch URL/path positional; use @samp{--fetch} and/or @samp{--push} to set them explicitly. In the remote list buffer@comma{} the remote at point is used as the default.
@end table

@node Clone and Init
@section Clone and Init

@table @asis
@item @kbd{c} (@code{majutsu-git-clone-transient})
@kindex c
@findex majutsu-git-clone-transient
Clone a Git repository into a jj repo. Source may be a URL or path; @samp{--branch} can be repeated.
@item @kbd{i} (@code{majutsu-git-init-transient})
@kindex i
@findex majutsu-git-init-transient
Initialize a new Git-backed jj repository.
@end table

@node Export and Import
@section Export and Import

Jujutsu automatically exports/imports to the underlying Git repo@comma{} but you can trigger it manually:
@table @asis
@item @kbd{e} (@code{majutsu-git-export})
@kindex e
@findex majutsu-git-export
Run @samp{jj git export}.
@item @kbd{m} (@code{majutsu-git-import})
@kindex m
@findex majutsu-git-import
Run @samp{jj git import}.
@item @kbd{o} (@code{majutsu-git-root})
@kindex o
@findex majutsu-git-root
Show the Git directory path (@samp{jj git root}).
@end table

@node Workspaces
@chapter Workspaces

@menu
* Understanding Workspaces::
* Workspace Transient::
@end menu

@node Understanding Workspaces
@section Understanding Workspaces

Jujutsu supports multiple workspaces sharing the same repository storage. This is similar to Git worktrees but more integrated.

@node Workspace Transient
@section Workspace Transient

@table @asis
@item @kbd{Z / % (Emacs) / * (Evil)} (@code{majutsu-workspace})
@kindex Z / % (Emacs) / * (Evil)
@findex majutsu-workspace
Open the workspace transient.

@item @kbd{l} (@code{majutsu-workspace-list})
@kindex l
@findex majutsu-workspace-list
List all workspaces.
@item @kbd{v} (@code{majutsu-workspace-visit})
@kindex v
@findex majutsu-workspace-visit
Visit a workspace by changing @samp{default-directory} and refreshing Majutsu buffers.
@item @kbd{a} (@code{majutsu-workspace-add})
@kindex a
@findex majutsu-workspace-add
Add a new workspace.
@item @kbd{-t}
@kindex -t
Toggle trashing workspace directories after forgetting them.
@item @kbd{f} (@code{majutsu-workspace-forget})
@kindex f
@findex majutsu-workspace-forget
Forget a workspace. With @samp{-t} enabled from the workspace transient@comma{} also move its local directory to the system trash after @samp{jj workspace forget} succeeds. Majutsu refuses remote roots and any root that owns the shared @samp{.jj/repo} store. Before confirmation it records each existing directory's device/inode identity; after forget it will not trash a path that appeared@comma{} disappeared@comma{} changed identity@comma{} or became a repo-store owner. After a successful forget@comma{} every target is checked/attempted and any failures are reported together for manual cleanup.
@item @kbd{u} (@code{majutsu-workspace-update-stale})
@kindex u
@findex majutsu-workspace-update-stale
Update a stale workspace.
@item @kbd{n} (@code{majutsu-workspace-rename})
@kindex n
@findex majutsu-workspace-rename
Rename a workspace.
@item @kbd{r} (@code{majutsu-workspace-root})
@kindex r
@findex majutsu-workspace-root
Show and copy the current workspace root.
@end table

Workspace sections are rendered from a structured @samp{jj workspace list -T}
template. By default they show each workspace name@comma{} working-copy ids@comma{}
description@comma{} and resolved root path when available. If jj cannot resolve a
workspace root@comma{} Majutsu treats it as unavailable instead of showing the raw
@samp{<Error: ...>} text in the section body. Every machine field is JSON-encoded@comma{}
so newlines and other control characters in legal workspace paths cannot split
or truncate a record.

@node Conflict Resolution
@chapter Conflict Resolution

@menu
* Detecting Conflicts::
* Entering Conflict Mode::
* majutsu-conflict-mode Commands::
@end menu

@node Detecting Conflicts
@section Detecting Conflicts

JJ marks conflicts in the log with a "conflict" label. Expanding the revision
shows each exact conflicted path together with its conflict side count.

@node Entering Conflict Mode
@section Entering Conflict Mode

You can enter conflict handling from multiple places:
@table @asis
@item @kbd{m in the Ediff transient} (@code{majutsu-ediff-resolve})
@kindex m in the Ediff transient
@findex majutsu-ediff-resolve
Use the automatic resolve strategy.
@item @kbd{M in the Ediff transient} (@code{majutsu-ediff-resolve-with-conflict})
@kindex M in the Ediff transient
@findex majutsu-ediff-resolve-with-conflict
Force the conflict workflow. This opens the working-copy file (or a revision blob buffer for non-working-copy revisions)@comma{} enables @samp{majutsu-conflict-mode}@comma{} and jumps to the first conflict.
@end table

@deffn Command majutsu-conflict-ensure-mode
Enable conflict handling in a file with conflict markers.
@end deffn

@samp{majutsu-conflict} auto-detects marker styles:
@itemize
@item
JJ conflict markers (@samp{%%%%%%%} / @samp{+++++++} / @samp{-------} ) -> enable @samp{majutsu-conflict-mode}.
@item
JJ long conflict markers (e.g.@comma{} 15-char marker runs) are treated the same as normal markers.
@item
JJ conflicts with missing terminating newline markers are parsed with jj's newline-compensation semantics.
@item
Git-style markers (@samp{|||||||} / @samp{=====}) only -> enable @samp{smerge-mode}.
@end itemize

@node majutsu-conflict-mode Commands
@section majutsu-conflict-mode Commands

Emacs bindings use the prefix @code{C-c ^}:
@table @asis
@item @kbd{n / p} (@code{majutsu-conflict-next / majutsu-conflict-prev})
@kindex n / p
@findex majutsu-conflict-next / majutsu-conflict-prev
Jump to the next or previous conflict.
@item @kbd{b} (@code{majutsu-conflict-keep-base})
@kindex b
@findex majutsu-conflict-keep-base
Keep the conflict base (snapshot / rebase destination section).
@item @kbd{1..9} (@code{majutsu-conflict-keep-side})
@kindex 1..9
@findex majutsu-conflict-keep-side
Keep side N (the "after" side in JJ diff blocks).
@item @kbd{M-1..M-9} (@code{majutsu-conflict-keep-side})
@kindex M-1..M-9
@findex majutsu-conflict-keep-side
Keep side N's "before" variant.
@item @kbd{R} (@code{majutsu-conflict-refine})
@kindex R
@findex majutsu-conflict-refine
Refine conflict regions with word-level highlighting.
@end table

Evil bindings are available in normal state:
@table @asis
@item @kbd{]] / gj} (@code{majutsu-conflict-next})
@kindex ]] / gj
@findex majutsu-conflict-next
Jump to the next conflict.
@item @kbd{[[ / gk} (@code{majutsu-conflict-prev})
@kindex [[ / gk
@findex majutsu-conflict-prev
Jump to the previous conflict.
@item @kbd{gb} (@code{majutsu-conflict-keep-base})
@kindex gb
@findex majutsu-conflict-keep-base
Keep the base.
@item @kbd{gr 1..9} (@code{majutsu-conflict-keep-side})
@kindex gr 1..9
@findex majutsu-conflict-keep-side
Keep side N (the "after" side).
@item @kbd{gR 1..9} (@code{majutsu-conflict-keep-side})
@kindex gR 1..9
@findex majutsu-conflict-keep-side
Keep side N's "before" variant.
@item @kbd{ge} (@code{majutsu-conflict-refine})
@kindex ge
@findex majutsu-conflict-refine
Refine the conflict.
@end table

@node Customizing
@chapter Customizing

@menu
* Essential Settings::
* Confirmation Settings::
* Process Options::
* Display Options::
* Diff Options::
* Buffer Hooks::
* Description Options::
* Evil Integration::
@end menu

@node Essential Settings
@section Essential Settings

@defopt majutsu-jj-executable
Path to the @samp{jj} binary (default: @samp{"jj"}).
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-jj-global-arguments
Global arguments passed to all jj commands (default: @samp{("--no-pager" "--color=always")}).
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-jj-diffstat-columns
Column width used only for @samp{jj diff --stat} (default: @samp{80}). Set to @samp{nil} to inherit terminal width. Raise it if you want more full path visibility; keep it near 80 if you prefer compact stat bars.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-transient-default-action
Key used for primary/default action suffixes in Majutsu transients (default: @samp{RET}). Set it to another key description@comma{} such as @samp{.}@comma{} to move the default action key.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-show-process-buffer-hint
Whether to show the "Type $ for details" hint on errors.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-debug
Enable debug logging for jj operations.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-show-command-output
Show jj command output in messages.
@end defopt

@node Confirmation Settings
@section Confirmation Settings

@defopt majutsu-confirm-critical-actions
If non-nil@comma{} prompt for confirmation before critical operations like abandon@comma{} undo@comma{} redo@comma{} rebase.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-no-confirm
A list of symbols for actions Majutsu should not confirm@comma{} or @samp{t} to never confirm. Valid symbols: @samp{undo}@comma{} @samp{redo}@comma{} @samp{abandon}@comma{} @samp{rebase}@comma{} @samp{workspace-forget}@comma{} @samp{workspace-trash}.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-slow-confirm
A list of actions that should use @samp{yes-or-no-p} instead of @samp{y-or-n-p}.
@end defopt

@node Process Options
@section Process Options

@defopt majutsu-process-popup-time
Popup the process buffer if a command takes longer than this many seconds. @samp{-1} means never@comma{} @samp{0} means immediately.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-process-log-max
Maximum number of sections to keep in a process log buffer (default: 32).
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-process-apply-ansi-colors
When non-nil@comma{} convert ANSI escapes in jj output to text properties.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-process-timestamp-format
Format string for timestamps in process buffer sections.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-jj-environment
Extra @samp{KEY=VALUE} entries prepended to subprocess environments for all jj invocations (local and TRAMP)@comma{} applied centrally by @samp{majutsu-process}.
@end defopt

@node Display Options
@section Display Options

@defopt majutsu-log-commit-columns
Flat log row column declarations controlling templates@comma{} modules@comma{} face policy@comma{} and postprocessing. For protocol details@comma{} module semantics@comma{} and examples@comma{} see @emph{Inspecting -> Log Buffer}.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-log-template-<field>
Template forms consumed by log fields. For newline and control-character rules@comma{} see @emph{Inspecting -> Log Buffer}.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-log-sections-hook
Hook run to insert sections in the log buffer.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-display-buffer-function
Magit-style display strategy (default: @samp{majutsu-display-buffer-traditional}; traditional@comma{} same-window-except-diff@comma{} fullframe@comma{} topleft@comma{} fullcolumn).
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-pre-display-buffer-hook
Hook run before displaying a buffer.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-post-display-buffer-hook
Hook run after displaying a buffer.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-bury-buffer-function
Function used by @code{q} to bury/quit Majutsu buffers (default: @samp{majutsu-mode-quit-window}; alternatives include @samp{quit-window} and @samp{majutsu-restore-window-configuration}).
@end defopt

@node Diff Options
@section Diff Options

@defopt majutsu-diff-refine-hunk
Whether to show word-granularity differences inside hunks. @samp{nil} disables@comma{} @samp{t} refines current hunk@comma{} @samp{'all} refines all hunks.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-diff-fontify-hunk
Whether to apply syntax highlighting to diff hunks. @samp{nil} disables@comma{} @samp{t} fontifies a hunk when it becomes current@comma{} and @samp{'all} fontifies all hunks immediately. This is synchronous and can be slow on large diffs.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-diff-refine-ignore-whitespace
Whether to ignore whitespace while refining hunks.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-diff-refine-max-chars
Skip word refinement when a hunk spans more than this many characters.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-diff-paint-whitespace
Whether to highlight whitespace issues inside diff hunks.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-diff-highlight-trailing
Whether to mark trailing whitespace in diff hunks.
@end defopt

@node Buffer Hooks
@section Buffer Hooks

@defopt majutsu-create-buffer-hook
Normal hook run when a new Majutsu buffer is created.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-setup-buffer-hook
Normal hook run after displaying the buffer.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-post-create-buffer-hook
Normal hook run after the initial refresh.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-refresh-buffer-hook
Normal hook run after refreshing.
@end defopt

@node Description Options
@section Description Options

@defopt majutsu-jjdescription-major-mode
Major mode used for editing JJ description buffers (default: @code{text-mode}).
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-jjdescription-comment-prefix
Comment prefix used in JJ description buffers (default: @samp{"JJ:"}).
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-jjdescription-change-id-face
Face used for JJ Change ID values.
@end defopt

@defopt global-majutsu-jjdescription-mode
Global minor mode to enable JJ description buffer enhancements.
@end defopt

@node Evil Integration
@section Evil Integration

@defopt majutsu-evil-enable-integration
Set to @samp{nil} to disable automatic Evil bindings.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-evil-initial-state
The Evil state to start in (default: @samp{normal}).
@end defopt

When Evil integration is enabled@comma{} the dispatcher displays and accepts the same Evil-facing top-level keys used in Majutsu buffers@comma{} including @samp{x}@comma{} @samp{L}@comma{} @samp{_}@comma{} @samp{*}@comma{} @samp{u}@comma{} @samp{C-r}@comma{} and @samp{`}. The global Evil @samp{v} binding remains Visual state; open evolog from the dispatcher with @samp{? v}.

@node Template DSL
@chapter Template DSL

@menu
* Overview::
* Why Use the DSL@?::
* Basic Syntax::
* Method Calls and Self::
* Operators::
* Conditionals and Composition::
* Elisp Embedding::
* Anonymous Functions and Higher-Order Operations::
* Extending the DSL::
* Type System and Upstream Alignment::
* Supported Commands (for development reference)::
@end menu

@node Overview
@section Overview

Majutsu includes a domain-specific language (DSL) for building Jujutsu templates in Emacs Lisp. The main entry point is @samp{majutsu-tpl}@comma{} which compiles a vector-based DSL form into a jj template string.

@node Why Use the DSL@?
@section Why Use the DSL@?

The DSL provides several advantages over writing raw template strings:

@itemize
@item
@strong{Compile-time validation}: Syntax errors are caught during byte-compilation rather than at runtime when jj executes the template.
@item
@strong{Automatic escaping}: String literals are properly escaped (quotes@comma{} backslashes@comma{} control characters) without manual intervention.
@item
@strong{Elisp integration}: Embed Elisp expressions that evaluate at compile time@comma{} enabling dynamic template generation based on configuration or context.
@item
@strong{Composability}: Define reusable template functions with @samp{majutsu-template-defun} that expand inline@comma{} avoiding runtime overhead.
@item
@strong{Type awareness}: The DSL understands jj's type system@comma{} enabling self-type context for cleaner keyword syntax (@samp{[:description]} instead of @samp{[:method [:self] :description]}).
@item
@strong{Readability}: Vector-based syntax with keywords is more readable than deeply nested string concatenation.
@end itemize

Example comparison:
@lisp
;; Raw string (error-prone@comma{} hard to read)
"if(self.root()@comma{} \"(root)\"@comma{} self.commit_id().short())"

;; DSL (validated@comma{} composable@comma{} readable)
(majutsu-tpl [:if [:root] "(root)" [:commit_id :short]] 'Commit)
@end lisp

@node Basic Syntax
@section Basic Syntax

@menu
* Vectors and Concatenation::
* String Literals::
* Raw Injection::
* Booleans and Numbers::
@end menu

@node Vectors and Concatenation
@subsection Vectors and Concatenation

Vectors without a leading keyword are implicitly concatenated:
@lisp
(majutsu-tpl ["A" "B"])           ; => "concat(\"A\"@comma{} \"B\")"
(majutsu-tpl [:concat "A" "B"])   ; => "concat(\"A\"@comma{} \"B\")"
@end lisp

Bare strings inside vectors are automatically treated as string literals (@samp{:str}).

@node String Literals
@subsection String Literals

Use @samp{:str} for explicit string literals with proper escaping:
@lisp
(majutsu-tpl [:str "Hello \"World\""])  ; => "Hello \"World\""
@end lisp

@node Raw Injection
@subsection Raw Injection

Use @samp{:raw} to inject template code directly without escaping:
@lisp
(majutsu-tpl [:raw "self.commit_id().short()"])  ; => "self.commit_id().short()"
@end lisp

Untyped raw snippets now default to semantic type @samp{Unknown} rather than
pretending to be @samp{Template}. If you want method-chain typing to keep flowing@comma{}
add an explicit annotation:
@lisp
[:raw "self" :Commit]
@end lisp

The callable position of @samp{:call} can be written as a quoted symbol@comma{}
keyword@comma{} or string name:
@lisp
(majutsu-tpl [:call 'coalesce [:str ""] [:str "X"]])  ; => "coalesce(\"\"@comma{} \"X\")"
@end lisp

@node Booleans and Numbers
@subsection Booleans and Numbers

Elisp @samp{t} and @samp{nil} map to @samp{true} and @samp{false}. Numbers pass through directly:
@lisp
(majutsu-tpl [:if t "yes" "no"])      ; => "if(true@comma{} \"yes\"@comma{} \"no\")"
(majutsu-tpl [:call 'pad_end 8 "x"])  ; => "pad_end(8@comma{} \"x\")"
@end lisp

@node Method Calls and Self
@section Method Calls and Self

@menu
* Explicit Method Chaining::
* Implicit Self Context::
* Explicit Receiver References::
* Binding Self in Helper Bodies::
@end menu

@node Explicit Method Chaining
@subsection Explicit Method Chaining

Use @samp{:method} to call methods on objects. Methods can be chained:
@lisp
(majutsu-tpl [:method [:raw "commit" :Commit] :commit_id])
; => "commit.commit_id()"

(majutsu-tpl [:method [:raw "commit" :Commit] :parents :len])
; => "commit.parents().len()"

(majutsu-tpl [:method [:raw "commit" :Commit] :diff "src"])
; => "commit.diff(\"src\")"
@end lisp

@node Implicit Self Context
@subsection Implicit Self Context

At public compile entry points@comma{} when a self type is provided (or the default
self type is configured)@comma{} Majutsu installs a root @samp{self} binding and bare
keywords become method calls on that receiver:
@lisp
(majutsu-tpl [:description] 'Commit)      ; => "self.description()"
(majutsu-tpl [:parents :len] 'Commit)     ; => "self.parents().len()"
@end lisp

@node Explicit Receiver References
@subsection Explicit Receiver References

Use @samp{[:self]} when you need the current implicit receiver as a value. When
nested lambdas or helper-local @samp{:bind-self} scopes introduce new receivers@comma{}
@samp{[:self N]} selects the outer binding @samp{N} levels up (@samp{[:self 0]} is the same
as @samp{[:self]}):
@lisp
(majutsu-tpl [:method [:self] :description] 'Commit)
; => "self.description()"

(majutsu-tpl [:method [:raw "self" :Commit]
                      :parents
                      :map
                      [:|p| [:method [:self 1] :description]]])
; => "self.parents().map(|p| self.description())"
@end lisp

@node Binding Self in Helper Bodies
@subsection Binding Self in Helper Bodies

Ordinary helpers can temporarily rebind the implicit @samp{self} inside their body
with @samp{:bind-self}:
@lisp
(majutsu-template-defun show-canonical-log-id ((object Commit :optional t))
  (:returns Template :bind-self object)
  [:canonical-log-id])
@end lisp

When the bound parameter is nil@comma{} the helper inherits the outer @samp{self} binding.

@node Operators
@section Operators

Arithmetic and logical operators are supported:
@lisp
(majutsu-tpl [:+ 1 2])              ; => "(1 + 2)"
(majutsu-tpl [:and [:> 3 1] [:<= 2 2]])  ; => "((3 > 1) && (2 <= 2))"
(majutsu-tpl [:not t])              ; => "(!true)"
(majutsu-tpl [:++ "L" "R"])         ; => "(\"L\" ++ \"R\")"
@end lisp

@node Conditionals and Composition
@section Conditionals and Composition

@lisp
(majutsu-tpl [:if [:root] "(root)" [:commit_id]])
; => "if(self.root()@comma{} \"(root)\"@comma{} self.commit_id())"

(majutsu-tpl [:separate " " [:label "a" "A"] [:label "b" "B"]])
; => "separate(\" \"@comma{} label(\"a\"@comma{} \"A\")@comma{} label(\"b\"@comma{} \"B\"))"
@end lisp

@node Elisp Embedding
@section Elisp Embedding

Elisp expressions are evaluated when the template is compiled.
@lisp
(let* ((tmp 1)
       (s1 `[:concat @comma{}(if (> 2 tmp) [:str "T"] [:str "F"]) [:str "!"]])
       (s2 [:concat (if (> 2 tmp) [:str "T"] [:str "F"]) [:str "!"]])
       (tmp 3))
  (concat (majutsu-tpl s1) (majutsu-tpl s2)))
; => "concat(\"T\"@comma{} \"!\")concat(\"F\"@comma{} \"!\")"
@end lisp

@node Anonymous Functions and Higher-Order Operations
@section Anonymous Functions and Higher-Order Operations

Anonymous functions are first-class template values:
@lisp
(majutsu-tpl [:lambda [c] [:description]])
; => "|c| c.description()"

(majutsu-tpl [:|c| [:description]])
; => "|c| c.description()"

(majutsu-tpl [:parents :map [:|c| [:description]]])
; => "self.parents().map(|c| c.description())"

(majutsu-tpl [:call [:|c| [:description]] [:raw "item" :Commit]])
; => "item.description()"

(majutsu-tpl [[:lambda [c] [:description]] [:raw "item" :Commit]])
; => "item.description()"
@end lisp

The shorthand @samp{[:|c| BODY]} is equivalent to @samp{[:lambda [c] BODY]}.

Lambda parameters are lexical variables and can act as a deferred implicit @samp{self}
for bare keyword dispatch. A surface lambda such as @samp{[:lambda [c] [:description]]}
is therefore kept generic first and can later be specialized from a typed call
argument or a higher-order container element. In those cases @samp{[:description]}
becomes equivalent to @samp{[:method 'c :description]}. If you prefer@comma{} you can also
write that explicit @samp{[:method 'c ...]} form directly@comma{} but most examples use bare
keywords because it better matches the implicit-self model. Explicit lexical
references also keep working across nested lambdas@comma{} so inner bodies may still
refer to outer parameters by name when that is clearer than rebinding receiver
context. This deferred behavior is limited to lambda parameters; Majutsu no
longer uses unknown non-lambda receivers as a general bare-keyword fallback. If
you need an outer receiver explicitly inside a nested lambda@comma{} use @samp{[:self N]}.

For example@comma{} the inner body below uses all three forms at once: @samp{[:description]}
for the inner receiver@comma{} @samp{[:self 1]} for the outer receiver@comma{} and explicit
@samp{[:method 'o ...]} for the outer lexical parameter:
@lisp
(majutsu-tpl
 [[:|o|
   [[:|i|
     [:if [:method 'o :root]
         [:description]
       [:method [:self 1] :description]]]
    [:raw "inner" :Commit]]]
  [:raw "outer" :Commit]])
; => "if(outer.root()@comma{} inner.description()@comma{} outer.description())"
@end lisp

List-oriented methods can be written in several equivalent styles:
@lisp
;; Historical explicit-binder sugar (lowers to a native lambda internally)
(majutsu-tpl [:map [:raw "self.bookmarks()"] b [:raw "b.name()"]])
; => "self.bookmarks().map(|b| b.name())"

;; Direct jj-style method call with an anonymous lambda
(majutsu-tpl [:method [:raw "refs"] :map [:lambda [c] [:description]]])
; => "refs.map(|c| c.description())"

;; Dash-style explicit lambda
(majutsu-tpl [:-map [:lambda [c] [:description]] [:raw "refs"]])
; => "refs.map(|c| c.description())"

;; Dash-style anaphoric shorthand
(majutsu-tpl [:--map [:method 'it :description] [:raw "refs"]])
; => "refs.map(|it| it.description())"

(majutsu-tpl [:method
              [:map [:raw "self.parents()"] p [:raw "p.commit_id()"]]
              :join [:str "@comma{} "]])
; => "self.parents().map(|p| p.commit_id()).join(\"@comma{} \")"

(majutsu-tpl [:method [:raw "self.parents()"]
                      :map [:lambda [p] [:raw "p.commit_id()"]]
                      :join [:str "@comma{} "]])
; => "self.parents().map(|p| p.commit_id()).join(\"@comma{} \")"
@end lisp

Prefer direct lambdas and @samp{:map} + @samp{:join} composition in new code. The
historical binder form @samp{[:map collection var body]} remains as compatibility
sugar@comma{} but it now lowers through the same core @samp{:method} + @samp{:lambda} path as
direct method calls. Similarly@comma{} @samp{:-map} remains a value-level explicit-lambda
helper while the @samp{:--map} family is syntax sugar layered on top of the same
lambda support.

This is a deliberate Majutsu DSL adaptation. Upstream jj centers the
higher-order story around expressions such as @samp{collection.map(|x| body)};
Majutsu keeps that core model and layers additional sugar on top of it.
Reusable lambda bodies can therefore also be defined as ordinary helpers that
return native lambda values:
@lisp
(majutsu-template-defun description-fn ()
  (:returns Lambda)
  [:lambda [c] [:description]])

(majutsu-tpl [:description-fn])
; => "|c| c.description()"

(majutsu-tpl [:method [:raw "refs"] :map [:description-fn]])
; => "refs.map(|c| c.description())"

(majutsu-template-defun description-with-suffix ((suffix Template))
  (:returns Lambda)
  `[:lambda [c] [:concat [:description] @comma{}suffix]])

(majutsu-tpl [:method [:raw "refs"] :map [:description-with-suffix [:str "!"]]])
; => "refs.map(|c| concat(c.description()@comma{} \"!\"))"
@end lisp

@node Extending the DSL
@section Extending the DSL

Use @samp{majutsu-template-defun} to define reusable template functions:
@lisp
(majutsu-template-defun my-helper ((label Template) (value Template :optional t))
  (:returns Template)
  `[:concat @comma{}label [:str ": "] @comma{}(or value [:str ""])])

(majutsu-tpl [:my-helper [:str "ID"] [:str "VAL"]])
; => "concat(\"ID\"@comma{} \": \"@comma{} \"VAL\")"
@end lisp

When a helper omits its body@comma{} @samp{majutsu-template-defun} defaults to a simple
wrapper around the same jj callable name:
@lisp
(majutsu-template-defun my-fill ((width Integer) (content Template))
  (:returns Template))

(majutsu-tpl [:my-fill 8 "x"])
; => "my-fill(8@comma{} \"x\")"
@end lisp

Syntax-level sugar should be defined separately with
@samp{majutsu-template-defspecial}@comma{} which receives raw forms and lowers them to more
primitive template syntax:
@lisp
(majutsu-template-defspecial :wrap-angle (body)
  `[:concat [:str "<"] @comma{}body [:str ">"]])

(majutsu-tpl [:wrap-angle [:str "x"]])
; => "concat(\"<\"@comma{} \"x\"@comma{} \">\")"
@end lisp

Owner-bound methods can also be defined locally in the DSL@. A body-less
@samp{majutsu-template-defmethod} / @samp{majutsu-template-defkeyword} declaration just
registers metadata for a native/rendered method@comma{} but providing a body turns it
into a local owner-bound lowering:
@lisp
(majutsu-template-defkeyword canonical-log-id Commit
  (:returns Template)
  [:if [:or [:hidden]
             [:divergent]]
       [:commit_id :shortest 8]
     [:change_id :shortest 8]])

(majutsu-tpl [:canonical-log-id] 'Commit)
; => "if((self.hidden() || self.divergent())@comma{} self.commit_id().shortest(8)@comma{} self.change_id().shortest(8))"

(majutsu-tpl [:method [:raw "p" :Commit] :canonical-log-id])
; => "if((p.hidden() || p.divergent())@comma{} p.commit_id().shortest(8)@comma{} p.change_id().shortest(8))"
@end lisp

@node Type System and Upstream Alignment
@section Type System and Upstream Alignment

The DSL supports Jujutsu's type system: @samp{Any}@comma{} @samp{String}@comma{} @samp{Boolean}@comma{} @samp{Integer}@comma{}
@samp{Template}@comma{} @samp{Commit}@comma{} @samp{Signature}@comma{} @samp{Timestamp}@comma{} @samp{List}@comma{} @samp{Option}@comma{} and more.
Type annotations can be added to @samp{:raw} nodes:
@lisp
[:raw "self" :Commit]  ; Declares the raw value has type Commit
@end lisp

Without an annotation@comma{} @samp{:raw} remains @samp{Unknown}. This keeps the DSL honest:
raw snippets still compile@comma{} but richer type propagation only kicks in once the
expression is explicitly typed or inferred through later semantic steps.

Majutsu distinguishes between broad @samp{Any} expression placeholders and the
narrower printable @samp{Template} capability. In practice@comma{} @samp{Any} means “some
expression”@comma{} while @samp{Template} means content that can actually be rendered or
concatenated.

Majutsu also propagates core result types through the normalized AST@. For
example@comma{} @samp{parents()} is tracked as a list of commits@comma{} @samp{lines()} as a list of
strings@comma{} @samp{trailers()} as @samp{(:list Trailer)}@comma{} mapped lists use ordinary
container refs such as @samp{(:list String)}@comma{} and list methods such as @samp{first()}
preserve the element type.

A few upstream categories are still intentionally simplified in Majutsu's
checker. For parameters that upstream models as @samp{StringLiteral}@comma{} Majutsu
currently recognizes obvious literal strings@comma{} but it does not try to prove that
more complex expressions become literals after helper expansion or constant
folding. Upstream also has distinct @samp{AnyList}-style result categories; Majutsu
currently models those as ordinary container refs instead.

@node Supported Commands (for development reference)
@section Supported Commands (for development reference)

Templates can be used with these jj commands:

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Command
@tab Self Type
@item log
@tab Commit
@item show
@tab Commit
@item evolog
@tab CommitEvolutionEntry
@item diff
@tab TreeDiffEntry
@item bookmark list
@tab CommitRef
@item tag list
@tab CommitRef
@item file annotate
@tab AnnotationLine
@item file list
@tab TreeEntry
@item file show
@tab TreeEntry
@item op log
@tab Operation
@item op show
@tab Operation
@item workspace list
@tab WorkspaceRef
@item config list
@tab ConfigValue
@end multitable

@node Keystroke Index
@appendix Keystroke Index

@printindex ky

@node Function and Command Index
@appendix Function and Command Index

@printindex fn

@node Variable Index
@appendix Variable Index

@printindex vr

@bye
